The President:
This week, I've been traveling across our country to discuss
health insurance reform and to
hear directly from folks like
you -- your questions, your concerns, and your stories.
Now, I know there's been a lot
of attention paid to some of the
town hall meetings that are
going on around the country --
especially those where
tempers have flared.
You know how TV loves a ruckus.
But what you haven't seen -- because it's not as exciting --
are the many constructive
meetings going on all over the
country where Americans are
airing their hopes and concerns
about this very important issue.
I've been holding
some of my own,
and the stories I've heard have
really underscored why I believe
so strongly that health
insurance reform is a challenge
we can't ignore.
They're stories like
Lori Hitchcock's,
who I met in New
Hampshire this week.
Lori's got a
pre-existing condition,
so no insurance
company will cover her.
She's self-employed,
and in this economy,
she can't find a job that
offers health care --
so she's been uninsured
for two years.
Or they're stories like Katie
Gibson's, who I met in Montana.
When Katie tried to change
insurance companies,
she was sure to list her
pre-existing conditions on the
application and even called her
new company to confirm she'd
be covered.
Two months later,
she was dropped --
after she'd already gone
off her other insurance.
These are stories that
aren't being told --
stories of a health care system
that works better for the
insurance industry than it
does for the American people.
And that's why we are going to
pass health insurance reform
that finally holds the
insurance companies accountable.
But now's the hard part.
Because the history is clear -- every time we come close to
passing health insurance reform, the special interests with a
stake in the status quo use their influence and political
allies to scare and
mislead the American people.
As an example, let's look at one
of the scarier-sounding and more
ridiculous rumors out there -- that so-called "death panels"
would decide whether senior citizens get to live or die.
That rumor began with the
distortion of one idea in a
Congressional bill that
would allow Medicare to cover
voluntary visits with your
doctor to discuss your
end-of-life care -- if and
only if you decide to have
those visits.
It had nothing to do with
putting government in control of
your decisions; in fact,
it would give you all the
information you need
-- if you want it --
to put you in control
of your decisions.
When a conservative Republican
Senator who supported this idea
-- in fact, had long-fought for even more far-reaching proposals
-- found out how folks
were twisting the idea,
he called their misrepresentation --
and I quote -- "nuts."
So when folks with a stake in
the status quo keep inventing
these boogeymen in an
effort to scare people,
it's disappointing --
but it's not surprising.
We've seen it before.
When President Roosevelt
was working to create Social
Security, opponents warned it
would open the door to "federal
snooping" and force
Americans to wear dog tags.
When President Kennedy and
President Johnson were working
to create Medicare, opponents
warned of "socialized medicine."
Sound familiar?
Not only were those fears never
realized, but more importantly,
those programs have saved the
lives of tens of millions of
seniors, the disabled,
and the disadvantaged.
Those who would stand in the
way of reform will say almost
anything to scare you
about the cost of action.
But they won't say much
about the cost of inaction.
If you're worried about
rationed care, higher costs,
denied coverage, or bureaucrats
getting between you and your
doctor, then you should
know that that's what's
happening right now.
In the past three years, over
12 million Americans were
discriminated against by
insurance companies due to a
preexisting condition, or saw
their coverage denied or dropped
just when they got sick
and needed it most.
Americans whose jobs and health
care are secure today just don't
know if they'll be next to join the 14,000 who lose their health
insurance every single day.
And if we don't act, average
family premiums will keep rising
to more than $22,000
within a decade.
On the other hand, here's what a reformed health care system will
mean for you.
First, no matter
what you've heard,
if you like the doctor or the
health care plan you have,
you can keep it.
If you don't have insurance,
you'll finally be able to
afford insurance.
And everyone will have the
security and stability that's
missing today.
Insurance companies will be
prohibited from denying you
coverage because of
your medical history,
dropping your coverage
if you get sick,
or watering down your
coverage when it counts --
because there's no point in
having health insurance if it's
not there when you need it.
Insurance companies will no
longer be able to place some
arbitrary cap on the amount of
coverage you can receive in a
given year or a lifetime, and we
will place a limit on how much
you can be charged for
out-of-pocket expenses --
because no one in America
should go broke just because
they get sick.
Finally, we'll require insurance
companies to cover routine
checkups and preventive
care, like mammograms and
colonoscopies -- because there's no reason we shouldn't be saving
lives and dollars by catching diseases like breast cancer and
prostate cancer
on the front end.
So that's what reform means.
For all the chatter and
the noise out there,
what every American needs to
know is this: If you don't have
health insurance, you
will finally have quality,
affordable options
once we pass reform.
If you do have health insurance,
we will make sure that no
insurance company or government
bureaucrat gets between you and
the care that you need.
And we will deliver this in
a fiscally responsible way.
Now, I know there's
plenty of real concern and
skepticism out there.
I know that in a time
of economic upheaval,
the idea of change
can be unsettling,
and I know that there are folks
who believe that government
should have no role at all
in solving our problems.
These are legitimate differences
worthy of the real discussion
that America deserves -- one where we lower our voices,
listen to one another, and
talk about differences that
really exist.
Because while there may be
disagreements over how to go
about it, there is widespread
agreement on the urgent need to
reform a broken system
and finally hold insurance
companies accountable.
Nearly 50 years ago, in the midst of the noisy early battles
to create what would
become Medicare,
President Kennedy said, "I
refuse to see us live on the
accomplishments of
another generation.
I refuse to see this
country, and all of us,
shrink from these struggles
which are our responsibility
in our time."
Now it falls to us to meet
the challenges of our time.
And if we can come together,
and listen to one another;
I believe, as I always have,
that we will rise to this
moment, we will build something
better for our children,
and we will secure America's
future in this new century.